构词-类比法：
bow
n.
船首 front of a ship
这个意思和弓没有关系，是由两个不同的词源引申来的，这个词源的本意是shoulder,arm

n.
1.弓
2.弯曲物，弧形物
3.曲线，弯曲
4.（小提琴等弦乐器的）弓
v.
1.弯曲，使弯曲
2.用弓拉（小提琴等弦乐器）
引申：v.
1.鞠躬(表示赞同、问候)
2.点头，弯腰，鞠躬，屈膝（以示尊敬、同意、招呼等）
3.（对权威）服从，屈从，屈服；让步，认输


fathom
n.
1.length of the outstretched arm(a measure of about six feet)
英寻(英制水深单位，合6英尺或1.6288米，主要用于航行或采矿的度量单位)
引申2.洞察力，理解力
v.
1.测...的深度
2.探索
3.洞察，差地了解
More：
fathomable 看得透的；可测明深度的；可了解的
unfathomable 看不透的，深不可测的；无底的；莫测高深的

phosphorescence  phos:light & phoros:bear,carry & escent:beginning,tending to be & ence

congregate 聚集 (con:com- & greg-:flock, herd) 
More:aggregate 集合，聚集 (ad:to)  gregarious[grɪ'gɛrɪəs] 群居的 segregate(se:apart from，on one's own) 使隔离

备用：
credit  credential
the great well(great wall)
below be:by
school
buoy ['bʊi]


The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on the table and the old man took off his trousers and went to bed in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them. He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old newspapers that covered the springs(弹簧) of the bed.
He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a boy and the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and the high capes(海岬) and the great brown mountains. He lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the surf roar(呼啸) and saw the native boats come riding through it. He smelled the tar(焦油) and oakum(麻絮) of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of Africa that the land breeze brought at morning.
Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go and wake the boy. But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea and then he dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads(停泊处) of the Canary Islands.
He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences(时间), nor of great fish, nor fights, nor contests(竞赛) of strength, nor of his wife. He only dreamed of places now and of the lions on the beach. They played like young cats in the dusk(黄昏) and he loved them as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. He simply woke, looked out the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He urinated(撒尿) outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the boy. He was shivering with the morning cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing(划船).
The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it and walked in quietly with his bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot(简易床) in the first room and the old man could see him clearly with the light that came in from the dying moon. He took hold of one foot gently and held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him. The old man nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and, sitting on the bed, pulled them on.
The old man went out the door and the boy came after him. He was sleepy and the old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, “I am sorry.”
“Qua Va,” the boy said. “It is what a man must do.”
They walked down the road to the old man’s shack and all along the road, in the dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of their boats.
When they reached the old man’s shack the boy took the rolls of line in the basket and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast with the furled sail on his shoulder.
“Do you want coffee?” the boy asked.
“We’ll put the gear in the boat and then get some.”
They had coffee from condensed milk(炼乳) cans at an early morning place that served fishermen.
“How did you sleep old man?” the boy asked. He was waking up now although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep.
“Very well, Manolin,” the old man said. “I feel confident today.”
“So do I,” the boy said. “Now I must get your sardines and mine and your fresh baits. He brings our gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry anything.”
“We’re different,” the old man said. “I let you carry things when you were five years old.”
“I know it,” the boy said. “I’ll be right back. Have another coffee. We have credit here.”
He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks(珊瑚岩), to the ice house where the baits were stored.
The old man drank his coffee slowly. It was all he would have all day and he knew that he should take it. For a long time now eating had bored him and he never carried a lunch. He had a bottle of water in the bow(船首) of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day.
The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a newspaper and they went down the trail(小径) to the skiff, feeling the pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid(滑入) her into the water.
“Good luck old man.”
“Good luck,” the old man said. He fitted the rope lashings(绳圈) of the oars(桨) onto the thole pins(桨栓) and, leaning forward against the thrust(插入) of the blades in the water, he began to row out of the harbour in the dark. There were other boats from the other beaches going out to sea and the old man heard the dip(下降) and push of their oars even though he could not see them now the moon was below the hills.
Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most of the boats were silent except for the dip of the oars. They spread apart after they were out of the mouth of the harbour and each one headed for the part of the ocean where he hoped to find fish. The old man knew he was going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out into the clean early morning smell of the ocean.
He saw the phosphorescence(磷光) of the Gulf weed(海草) in the water as he rowed over the part of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well(深井) because there was a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms(英寻,测量水深的长度单位) where all sorts of fish congregated(聚集) because of the swirl(漩涡) the current made against the steep walls of the floor of the ocean. Here there were concentrations of shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the wandering fish fed on them.
In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed he heard the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the hissing(嘶嘶声) that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in the darkness. He was very fond of flying fish as they were his principal friends on the ocean. He was sorry for the birds, especially the small delicate dark terns(燕鸥) that were always flying and looking and almost never finding, and he thought, the birds have a harder life than we do except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones. Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean can be so cruel? She is kind and very beautiful. But she can be so cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for the sea.
He always thought of the sea as la mar which is what people call her in Spanish when they love her. Sometimes those who love her say bad things of her but they are always said as though she were a woman. Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys(浮标) as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought when the shark livers had brought much money, spoke of her as el mar which is masculine. They spoke of her as a contestant or a place or even an enemy. But the old man always thought of her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great favours, and if she did wild or wicked(坏的) things it was because she could not help them. The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought.